We are here now to talk about Article 10.
Article 10 is about appropriation
for the Memorial Elementary School feasibility study.
I'm joined by Elise Gorsuch, chair of the school committee.
Thanks for joining us here today to talk about this article.
Basically just for the town meeting members benefit, this is
will involve borrowing, so it'll be a two thirds vote,
but could you just kind walk us through
what the feasibility study is, the timing, the why now,
the amounts, the players, what do we have
to look forward to at town meeting this fall?
Sure. Jeff, and thank you
so much for having us here today.
Sure. We, we've, we've brought the whole team,
so they're experts who will speak
to the details better than I will.
But basically what this is, is this is a project to
explore the feasibility
of rebuilding the Memorial Elementary School in conjunction
with the Massachusetts School Building Authority,
which is an organization that provides funding
for school buildings.
And we were invited into this program just about a year ago,
December of 2024, and is to move this project forward
by appropriating $2.6 million to fund a feasibility
and partial design study Okay. For this program.
So this is just the divine, the the design phase.
This is not about construction.
It is not, it's just about feasibility. Okay.
And to get to a partial design so that we can come back
to town meeting in a year
or so to ask for a debt exclusion
to fund the actual building project.
Right. And, and on that topic, 'cause should,
Should we be invited to move forward? Oh yeah. This
All requires us, if this goes forward,
you have to hit every, every step in
Process.
We have to hit the milestones with MSBA.
And one of the things that had come up
before on a previous article we've discussed on the videos
already was around why there was a question, like,
why couldn't we use some
of the remaining monies left over from the Kennedy project
for the feasibility study?
And that question was sort of brought up
and answered saying it wasn't around the same time period.
It wasn't like, like things, right.
You couldn't use the monies from the Kennedy project
that's left over, which is on a 20 year bond to pay for
a planning or study, which is around a five year timeframe.
So I wanted to point that out to say, one
of the reasons this is around new borrowing is
because it's really about, it's a new project
and it's, it's can't really use those funds yet.
Yes, exactly, Jeff. Exactly.
We, we received advice from council
that it wouldn't be an appropriate use
that the remaining Kennedy funds.
So our best way forward is to have short-term borrowing.
All right. And there's a project team
that's working on the feasibility study,
so we should probably get them up here to talk the details
and, and, and dig into the, into the specifics. Yep.
I'll turn things over to our
wonderful administrators. Alright,
Thanks.
Thank
You. So now I'm joined by the team
under Article 10 from, from the school department.
And so why don't we go down the, the line
and introduce who's here and,
and kind of your role for the,
for the school administration.
And then we'll jump right into the details
about what's under, under Article 10.
Okay, great. You
Wanna start?
Sure. I'm, I'm Matthew Gillis.
I'm the assistant superintendent for finance.
Karen Gani, principal at Memorial School.
Melissa Fash, superintendent.
Great. And so thanks for, for joining.
I know there's a lot of detail under its Article 10 also,
I think I'm expecting a lot of questions
from the floor of town meeting.
You've already gone through the government,
so you've already been to the finance committee,
you've already been to the select board.
And, and so here we are again talking about this on video.
So walk us through what the project is and,
and what you think town meetings should know
about what's in front of you.
Excellent. I'll start with a bit of, first of all,
thank you very much for having us here
and thank you to everybody who's
taking the time to listen in.
We're first gonna start with a slide
that really shows the process overview for the MSBA process.
It's nine modules. We're only at the very
beginning in module one.
They call it eligibility.
It as chairwoman Goeth mentioned,
it's a 270 day period.
It's not over yet until we get an appropriation
vote from town meeting.
So this is really that end point.
It's not guaranteed until we have that vote.
And that would move us into modules three
and four into feasibility study and schematic design.
And so that's really why we're here today
is to make a case for that.
It's worth noting we're at the very end, as we mentioned
before, we were invited in in December of 2024
and 270 days ends on Halloween.
And so that's actually perhaps
before town meeting we'll finalize and finish everything.
So we've asked for a brief extension,
but we don't anticipate that causing any issues.
So this is really that last step.
We pulled everything else together
and it's just really to move into the schematic design
and the feasibility portion where we come up
with what's called a preferred solution.
And that would again, come to the voters. Okay.
So right now we're really just talking about the
feasibility part of the project.
Yes. Okay. And I'll pass it on to Principal Gani,
who's really gonna go through sort
of what's happening at Memorial
and why are we even bringing this here. Yeah,
Sure.
So I moved over to Memorial this summer
and living in the space, learning more about it,
it's definitely overcrowded
and we're using class, we're using spaces as classrooms
that weren't originally designed to be classrooms.
And as we've done that, we've had to convert spaces
that are really not meant to be used regularly,
like entryways into the building
or wiring closets as teacher prep spaces.
Our afterschool program is housed like on the stage
in our auditorium.
So the, we're feeling the growth pains within the building
and we also have situations
where we're not meeting a DA compliance.
Our ramps are not code.
There's lack of accessibility to certain parts
of the building if you do require some kind of accommodation
and we're getting tired, like our roof is tired,
there's lots of leaks
and we need to
just think about the overall purpose of the building
and are we able to run it efficiently
and effectively in the service of our students
so that we can do our best work.
Yeah. I, I've actually been
to memorial school myself a couple of times.
Yeah. And from the outside it sort
of doesn't really show all
of what's going on inside the building.
You kind of have to walk through it. Yeah.
And you've done walkthroughs with the building
with folks from the select board and and others as well.
Yes. And what I hear from everyone that's seen it is
that it really is in, in in need
of a lot of work and repair.
Yeah. It's tired. Yeah, it's tired.
Can I speak to that for just one second? Sure.
So MSBA actually requires a site visit where they come.
And this is prior to Principal Gani being there. Okay.
And so they did a full site visit
where they went in every nook
and cranny back to the mechanical
rooms, to all the classrooms.
And I don't, they de,
I definitely would not have offered this
to us had they not verified the physical space
as reconciling with the SOI
or statement of interest document that we submitted.
They're very thorough and that's
after that visit was when they extended
the invitation to us.
Alright.
So what else should we know about what's being asked
for in terms of the money part of the project?
So anytime you bring something
before the voters, there has to be a dollar figure for them
to vote and that becomes our budget.
And there's really four pieces to that budget.
The first thing after we get invited in from MSBA and
after town being approves it, we need
to hire an owner's project manager.
Estimate for that is about $350,000.
They're coordinating meetings,
they're coordinating some testing and,
and some, some other things,
but it's not really the heavy, heavier part of their job.
They, they're a lot busier during construction.
We gotta get the architect on board.
That's a process we go through with MSBA
Natick has three votes on, on a panel of other professionals
that MSBA puts together helps us select the architect.
That's gonna be about $1.8 million we estimate.
We've had some strong interest from folks on the committee
and in the community for a geothermal renewable
energy source for the schools.
And so in order to find out if that's really gonna work,
you have to have some test wells.
So we've estimated about 180,000 for that.
And then there's some contingency and, and sub consultants,
'cause not everybody works for the OPM
or the architect IE traffic study is one of those things.
And that's about $270,000.
So it comes up to about 2.6 million.
We got that number from historical references from MSBA,
they won't tell you what to budget,
but they'll give you a list of other communities
and what they budgeted
and then you can kind of see whether they had one vote
or if they had to have more than one vote
to bring the project
to a preferred amount in a schematic design.
So like behind me, here is a great example
of town hall you're gonna, we're gonna see a rendering
and then a floor plan when we get through schematic design
of, of what the new memorial
or renovated memorial is gonna look like.
So the voters can conceptually see what it's gonna cost,
what it's gonna look like and what it's gonna cost.
And so that's really what we're trying to pay for
through feasibility and schematic design. Great.
And you mentioned something about timeline.
So this is, this vote in the fall time meeting again is the
next step in a journey in a process.
And so is there an action expected if this passes
and we go forward, is there something
that's also gonna be related to this project in the spring
as well or something in 2026 for town meeting
I in the spring for town meeting?
No, probably not even for
calendar 2026.
It, it might take, it might take us that long to, to get
through it because we'll be looking at different options
and those take a little bit of time
to sort of flush them out.
You know, is it on the right sites?
How big do we want it, you know,
do we want laid out in several different, different ways?
What programs are gonna be in the building, what,
what are we gonna have elsewhere?
So basically the architect
and the OPM help us come up with a list of all those options
and we, we figure it out
and you know, sometimes you can get
through if you have a long list, some are easy
to cross off quickly, but there will be people
with differences of opinion who want
to spend a little more time digging into what I'll call the,
the top options till we get to the most preferred one.
So we're not likely to, you know, get through this quickly.
Like I've been through this more than a handful
of times in other places over the years
and it always takes a little while to get everybody
or almost everybody to the preferred option. Yeah,
Sure.
And, and I don't know who might be asked best asked this Dr.
Spa, I'll ask you this question.
Having gone through this process so far, you know,
is there anything that you're hearing in terms
of from the community or
or things that you think AMI members should hear
to take away in terms of what the response has been from the
community about the project?
Yeah, what I would, one of the questions we've had
that I just thought of when Mr.
Gillis was presenting that is that if we don't spend all of
that 2.6 million, it just moves
into the next phase of the project.
Okay. That's one kind of critical point.
We did do some competitive analysis to make sure
that number was pretty solid,
but basically it's assure to be spent on this project
or it would be move forward or,
or not used the types of questions,
I mean we've received really favorable response.
The school committee as well as the select board as well
as the fin comm and a 13 0 0 vote move to move this forward
for positive action, which is very affirming.
I think everybody in our school community is very excited
about this prospect.
I mean we were building a lot
of schools in the sixties and this is one of them.
So it doesn't surprise me that's showing some age.
The other thing I wanna mention is
that this is when Matt says we,
it's really a school building committee
that is not made up only of district personnel.
We're the district personnel plus a school committee member.
It's made up of a member of fin com, a member
of the select board members
of all the different functions of the town.
So, and the community, I think it's four
or five members, this is posted on the website.
It is definitely a very collaborative team with a lot
of different expertise on it and, and community members.
So I don't want anyone to misinterpret
that this is some school driven process alone is really a
community driven process that we will have a lot
of community engagement around.
So other than that, I think you brought up this,
the stickier point in the beginning, which is whether
or not the funding from Kennedy could be used.
We went after that pretty aggressively until we learned
that that was not advisable.
And so the request is for an appropriation to borrow
Right.
And that and that request still
or that that idea of using leftover Kennedy money could
still be applied for the building phase
of the project. Right. So it's not off.
We are very hopeful that that would be, and
and again that would be, we crossed that bridge when we get
to it, but it 4.9 million is
on my mind in that way. Right. Yes,
Absolutely.
Yes. Anything else worth mentioning about the, the project?
Well, with our partner, the Mass School Building Authority
or MSBA, as we always call them right now,
our base reimbursement rate's 45 point 11%
that gets updated every calendar year.
So 2026, that could change a little bit,
but the, the Kennedy project when finalized was 48.21%.
We could get some incentive points depending on
our maintenance assessment
and what we choose to put into the design
to make the building more renewable, more green,
more more efficient.
MSBA has some incentives for, for certain endeavors
and we'll find that out sort of when we come to the close
of the schematic design process
because they, they're not gonna give you points if you
haven't designed it or incorporated it into the building.
Sure. So it, it's a pretty big partnership that
we hope, we hope the community supports
because there is no do nothing option eventually,
if this doesn't proceed then we have to consider fixing
and repairing a variety of systems in the building, the,
the building envelope heating HVA system, HVAC system,
some structural repairs
and we wouldn't get any reimbursement for that.
And we'd still have an old school.
I think most people can understand comparing it
to an old car with 150
or 250,000 miles depending on how, how you like
to maintain things that eventually you,
you just need to replace it.
And we, we feel like we're getting to that point,
but that's, that's more of a,
a natick whole community decision than just
the school building committee. Alright.
That might be a good place to, to end it.
I mean really that, that's the vote up for the,
for town meeting just to move forward
with the feasibility study.
And so, yeah. So thank you again.
And then, and if there's, if town meeting members have
questions, the, the website
for the school committee has a link out to the,
to the project team in the, in the,
in the school building building committee
that's working on this for a lot more detail.
And they're of course, I'm sure they can reach out if they
have specific questions.
Yeah. They can reach out to the school building committee
that has its own email or to me
and I'll get it to the building committee.
Alright. Yeah. Readily we, we welcome the input
and we're excited to make this a community
project should it move forward.
That's our belief that we should
represent the will of the community.
So we just think this is a really good deal
to get 45 cents at minimum on the dollar.
And to get into the MSBA cycles, it's like every five
to seven years that you're invited in.
So once this, it's not like we're gonna probably apply in in
another year and kind of repeat.
So it is timely and it is sort of high stakes. Alright.
Yeah, thanks again for coming in
and talking about the project and that's article 10
for your fall annual time meeting.
Thanks for having us, Jeff. Thanks. Thank you.